README.md, before:

# Laravel Forge Review App GitHub Action

Create/update and deploy a review-application on [Laravel Forge](https://forge.laravel.com) with GitHub action.

## Description

This action allows you to automatically create/update and deploy a review-app site on a server managed by Forge when you open a pull-request or push to a branch.

It works in combination with this other action which removes the review-app site when closing the pull-request:
[web-id-fr/forge-review-app-clean-action](https://github.com/web-id-fr/forge-review-app-clean-action)

### Action running process

All steps are done using [Forge API](https://forge.laravel.com/api-documentation).

- Create site and database if not done yet.
- Configure repository.
- Obtain Let's Encrypt certificate.
- Setup .env file using [stub file](#stub-files).
- Setup deploy script using [stub file](#stub-files).
- Launch deployment.
- Check deployment and display result output.

### Optional inputs variables

The action will determines the name of the site (host) and the database if they are not specified (which is **recommended**).

The `host` is based on the branch name (escaping it with only `a-z0-9-` chars) and the `root_domain`.

For example, a `fix-37` branch with `mydomain.tld` root_domain will result in a `fix-37.mydomain.tld` host.

`database_name` is also based on the branch name (escaping it with only `a-z0-9_` chars).

### About stub files
<a name="stub-files"></a>

Stub files must be present on the github workspace of your running workflow before call this action.

You can achieve this using the [checkout action](https://github.com/actions/checkout) on a previous step like this:

```yaml
- name: Checkout stubs file
  uses: actions/checkout@v3
  with:
    sparse-checkout: |
      .github/workflows/.env.stub
      .github/workflows/deploy-script.stub
    sparse-checkout-cone-mode: false
```

#### .env stub file

You must create stub file at the path `.github/workflows/.env.stub` on your repository and checkout the file before running this action (see `env_stub_path` input below).

This file will be used as a template to generate the real content of the .env of the site, by replacing the following strings:

| String                   | Replacement                          |
|--------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| `STUB_HOST`              | Host name of the review-app site.    |
| `STUB_DATABASE_NAME`     | Database name of the review-app.     |
| `STUB_DATABASE_USER`     | Database user of the review-app.     |
| `STUB_DATABASE_PASSWORD` | Database password of the review-app. |

## Deploy script stub file

You must create stub file at the path `.github/workflows/deploy-script.stub` on your repository and checkout the file before running this action (see `deploy_script_stub_path` input below).

This file will be used as a template to generate the real content of the deploy script of the site, by replacing the following strings:

String replacement map:

| String                   | Replacement                          |
|--------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| `STUB_HOST`              | Host name of the review-app site.    |


## Inputs

It is highly recommended that you store all inputs using [GitHub Secrets](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/reference/encrypted-secrets) or variables.

| Input                       | Required | Default                                | Description                                                                                                                                 |
|-----------------------------|----------|----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `forge_api_token`           | yes      |                                        | Laravel Forge API key.<br>You can generate an API key in your [Forge dashboard](https://forge.laravel.com/user-profile/api).                |
| `forge_server_id`           | yes      |                                        | Laravel Forge server ID                                                                                                                     |
| `root_domain`               | no       |                                        | Root domain under which to create review-app site.                                                                                          |
| `host`                      | no       |                                        | Site host of the review-app.<br>The branch name the action is running on will be used to generate it if not defined (recommended).          |
| `prefix_with_pr_number`     | no       | `true`                                 | Use the pull-request number as host and database prefix when host is not manually defined.                                                  |
| `fqdn_prefix`               | no       |                                        | Prefix the whole FQDN (e.g.: "app.")                                                                                                        |
| `project_type`              | no       | `php`                                  | Project type of the review-app.                                                                                                             |
| `directory`                 | no       | `/public`                              | Root directory for nginx configuration of the review-app.                                                                                   |
| `isolated`                  | no       | `false`                                | Isolate review-app site.                                                                                                                    |
| `php_version`               | no       | `php81`                                | PHP version of the review-app site.                                                                                                         |
| `create_database`           | no       | `false`                                | Create database for review-app.                                                                                                             |
| `database_user`             | no       | `forge`                                | Database user of the review-app site.                                                                                                       |
| `database_password`         | no       |                                        | Database password of the review-app site.<br>Mandatory if `create_database` is set to `true`                                                |
| `database_name`             | no       |                                        | Database name of the review-app site.<br>The branch name the action is running on will be used to generate it if not defined (recommended). |
| `database_name_prefix`      | no       |                                        | Database name prefix, useful for PostgreSQL that does not support digits (PR number) for first chars.                                       |
| `nginx_template`            | no       |                                        | Nginx template to use (default template if not defined).                                                                                    |
| `configure_repository`      | no       | `true`                                 | Configure repository on review-app site.                                                                                                    |
| `repository_provider`       | no       | `github`                               | Repository provider of review-app site.                                                                                                     |
| `repository`                | no       |                                        | Repository of review-app site.<br>The repository name the action is running on will be used to generate it if not defined.                  |
| `branch`                    | no       |                                        | Git branch to use.<br>The branch name the action is running on will be used to generate it if not defined.                                  |
| `composer`                  | no       | `false`                                | Composer install on repository setup.                                                                                                       |
| `letsencrypt_certificate`   | no       | `true`                                 | Obtain LetsEncrypt certificate for the review-app site.                                                                                     |
| `certificate_setup_timeout` | no       | `120`                                  | Maximum wait time in seconds for obtaining the certificate.                                                                                 |
| `env_stub_path`             | no       | `.github/workflows/.env.stub`          | .env stub file path inside git repository.                                                                                                  |
| `deploy_script_stub_path`   | no       | `.github/workflows/deploy-script.stub` | Deploy script stub file path inside the git repository.                                                                                     |
| `deployment_timeout`        | no       | `120`                                  | Maximum wait time in seconds for deploying.                                                                                                 |
| `deployment_auto_source`    | no       | `true`                                 | Whether to automatically source environment variables into the deployment script.                                                           |
| `create_worker`             | no       | `false`                                | Create site worker.                                                                                                                         |
| `worker_connection`         | no       | `redis`                                | Worker connection (if creation is requested).                                                                                               |
| `worker_timeout`            | no       | `90`                                   | Worker timeout in seconds (if creation is requested).                                                                                       |
| `worker_sleep`              | no       | `60`                                   | Worker sleep time in seconds (if creation is requested).                                                                                    |
| `worker_tries`              | no       |                                        | Worker maximum tries (if creation is requested).                                                                                            |
| `worker_processes`          | no       | `1`                                    | Worker processes (if creation is requested).                                                                                                |
| `worker_stopwaitsecs`       | no       | `600`                                  | Worker stop wait secs (if creation is requested).                                                                                           |
| `worker_php_version`        | no       |                                        | Worker PHP version (if creation is requested). `php_version` input value will be used if not defined.                                       |
| `worker_daemon`             | no       | `true`                                 | Worker "daemon" (if creation is requested).                                                                                                 |
| `worker_force`              | no       | `false`                                | Worker "force" (if creation is requested).                                                                                                  |
| `worker_queue`              | no       |                                        | Worker queue (if creation is requested). Default queue will be used if not defined.                                                         |
| `horizon_enabled`           | no       | `false`                                | Enable Laravel Horizon integration.                                                                                                         |
| `scheduler_enabled`         | no       | `false`                                | Enable Laravel Scheduler integration.                                                                                                       |
| `quick_deploy_enabled`      | no       | `false`                                | Enable quick deployment trigger.                                                                                                            |


## Outputs

| Output          | Description                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `host`          | Host of the review-app (generated or forced one in inputs).           |
| `database_name` | Database name of the review-app (generated or forced one in inputs).  |
| `site_id`       | Forge site ID of the review-app.                                      |
| `worker_id`     | Worker ID.                                                            |

You can easily use those outputs variables to generate a message on your pull-request with this action next:

```yaml
- name: PR Comment
  uses: unsplash/comment-on-pr@v1.3.0
  env:
    GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
  with:
    msg: ":rocket: Review-app available here: https://${{ steps.forge-review-app.outputs.host }}"
```

## Examples

Create or update a review-app on opened pull-requests:

```yml
name: review-app
on:
  pull_request:
    types: [ 'opened', 'reopened', 'synchronize', 'ready_for_review' ]

jobs:
  review-app:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    name: "Create or update Forge review-app"

    steps:
      - name: Deploy
        uses: web-id-fr/forge-review-app-action@v1.0.0
        with:
          forge_api_token: ${{ secrets.FORGE_API_TOKEN }}
          forge_server_id: ${{ secrets.FORGE_SERVER_ID }}
          create_database: 'true'
          database_password: ${{ secrets.FORGE_DB_PASSWORD }}
```

## Testing

We use [bats-core](https://github.com/bats-core/bats-core) for tests.


### Using Docker

Run tests using docker, locally:

```bash
docker run --rm -it $(docker build -q -f Dockerfile.test .) /code/test
```

### From your host

Prerequisites:

- bash
- curl
- jq
- shellcheck
- nodejs
- npm

Setup bats-core dependencies using npm, then run tests:

```bash
npm install
npm run test
```

## Credits

- [Ryan Gilles](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ryan-gilles-293680174/)

## License

The MIT License (MIT). Please see [License File](LICENSE.md) for more information.

Commit message:

Add support for domain aliases
- New aliases input parameter: Accepts a comma-separated list of aliases (e.g., "clientes, www, api")
- Automatic alias domain generation: Creates subdomains based on the main host
- SSL certificate support: All domains (main + aliases) are included in the Let's Encrypt certificate

When you provide aliases, the action automatically generates alias domains based on your main host:

```
with:
  root_domain: 'example.com'
  aliases: 'clientes, www, api'
```

If your main host becomes `123-feature.example.com`, the aliases will be:

- `clientes.123-feature.example.com`
- `www.123-feature.example.com`
- `api.123-feature.example.com`

README.md, after:

# Laravel Forge Review App GitHub Action

Create/update and deploy a review-application on [Laravel Forge](https://forge.laravel.com) with GitHub action.

## Description

This action allows you to automatically create/update and deploy a review-app site on a server managed by Forge when you open a pull-request or push to a branch.

It works in combination with this other action which removes the review-app site when closing the pull-request:
[web-id-fr/forge-review-app-clean-action](https://github.com/web-id-fr/forge-review-app-clean-action)

### Action running process

All steps are done using [Forge API](https://forge.laravel.com/api-documentation).

- Create site and database if not done yet.
- Configure repository.
- Obtain Let's Encrypt certificate.
- Setup .env file using [stub file](#stub-files).
- Setup deploy script using [stub file](#stub-files).
- Launch deployment.
- Check deployment and display result output.

### Optional inputs variables

The action will determines the name of the site (host) and the database if they are not specified (which is **recommended**).

The `host` is based on the branch name (escaping it with only `a-z0-9-` chars) and the `root_domain`.

For example, a `fix-37` branch with `mydomain.tld` root_domain will result in a `fix-37.mydomain.tld` host.

`database_name` is also based on the branch name (escaping it with only `a-z0-9_` chars).

### Aliases Support

The action supports creating domain aliases that are based on the main host. This is useful when you need multiple domains pointing to the same review app.

When you provide aliases using the `aliases` input parameter (comma-separated), the action will:

1. Create alias domains based on the main host
2. Include all aliases in the Let's Encrypt certificate request

**Examples:**
- If your main host is `123-feature.example.com` and aliases are `clientes, www`, you'll get:
  - Main domain: `123-feature.example.com`
  - Alias domains: `clientes.123-feature.example.com`, `www.123-feature.example.com`

- If your main host is `123-feature` (no root domain) and aliases are `api, admin`, you'll get:
  - Main domain: `123-feature`
  - Alias domains: `api-123-feature`, `admin-123-feature`

All domains will be included in the SSL certificate for HTTPS access.

### About stub files
<a name="stub-files"></a>

Stub files must be present on the github workspace of your running workflow before call this action.

You can achieve this using the [checkout action](https://github.com/actions/checkout) on a previous step like this:

```yaml
- name: Checkout stubs file
  uses: actions/checkout@v3
  with:
    sparse-checkout: |
      .github/workflows/.env.stub
      .github/workflows/deploy-script.stub
    sparse-checkout-cone-mode: false
```

#### .env stub file

You must create stub file at the path `.github/workflows/.env.stub` on your repository and checkout the file before running this action (see `env_stub_path` input below).

This file will be used as a template to generate the real content of the .env of the site, by replacing the following strings:

| String                   | Replacement                          |
|--------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| `STUB_HOST`              | Host name of the review-app site.    |
| `STUB_DATABASE_NAME`     | Database name of the review-app.     |
| `STUB_DATABASE_USER`     | Database user of the review-app.     |
| `STUB_DATABASE_PASSWORD` | Database password of the review-app. |

## Deploy script stub file

You must create stub file at the path `.github/workflows/deploy-script.stub` on your repository and checkout the file before running this action (see `deploy_script_stub_path` input below).

This file will be used as a template to generate the real content of the deploy script of the site, by replacing the following strings:

String replacement map:

| String                   | Replacement                          |
|--------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| `STUB_HOST`              | Host name of the review-app site.    |


## Inputs

It is highly recommended that you store all inputs using [GitHub Secrets](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/reference/encrypted-secrets) or variables.

| Input                       | Required | Default                                | Description                                                                                                                                 |
|-----------------------------|----------|----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `forge_api_token`           | yes      |                                        | Laravel Forge API key.<br>You can generate an API key in your [Forge dashboard](https://forge.laravel.com/user-profile/api).                |
| `forge_server_id`           | yes      |                                        | Laravel Forge server ID                                                                                                                     |
| `root_domain`               | no       |                                        | Root domain under which to create review-app site.                                                                                          |
| `host`                      | no       |                                        | Site host of the review-app.<br>The branch name the action is running on will be used to generate it if not defined (recommended).          |
| `prefix_with_pr_number`     | no       | `true`                                 | Use the pull-request number as host and database prefix when host is not manually defined.                                                  |
| `fqdn_prefix`               | no       |                                        | Prefix the whole FQDN (e.g.: "app.")                                                                                                        |
| `project_type`              | no       | `php`                                  | Project type of the review-app.                                                                                                             |
| `directory`                 | no       | `/public`                              | Root directory for nginx configuration of the review-app.                                                                                   |
| `isolated`                  | no       | `false`                                | Isolate review-app site.                                                                                                                    |
| `php_version`               | no       | `php81`                                | PHP version of the review-app site.                                                                                                         |
| `create_database`           | no       | `false`                                | Create database for review-app.                                                                                                             |
| `database_user`             | no       | `forge`                                | Database user of the review-app site.                                                                                                       |
| `database_password`         | no       |                                        | Database password of the review-app site.<br>Mandatory if `create_database` is set to `true`                                                |
| `database_name`             | no       |                                        | Database name of the review-app site.<br>The branch name the action is running on will be used to generate it if not defined (recommended). |
| `database_name_prefix`      | no       |                                        | Database name prefix, useful for PostgreSQL that does not support digits (PR number) for first chars.                                       |
| `nginx_template`            | no       |                                        | Nginx template to use (default template if not defined).                                                                                    |
| `configure_repository`      | no       | `true`                                 | Configure repository on review-app site.                                                                                                    |
| `repository_provider`       | no       | `github`                               | Repository provider of review-app site.                                                                                                     |
| `repository`                | no       |                                        | Repository of review-app site.<br>The repository name the action is running on will be used to generate it if not defined.                  |
| `branch`                    | no       |                                        | Git branch to use.<br>The branch name the action is running on will be used to generate it if not defined.                                  |
| `composer`                  | no       | `false`                                | Composer install on repository setup.                                                                                                       |
| `letsencrypt_certificate`   | no       | `true`                                 | Obtain LetsEncrypt certificate for the review-app site.                                                                                     |
| `certificate_setup_timeout` | no       | `120`                                  | Maximum wait time in seconds for obtaining the certificate.                                                                                 |
| `env_stub_path`             | no       | `.github/workflows/.env.stub`          | .env stub file path inside git repository.                                                                                                  |
| `deploy_script_stub_path`   | no       | `.github/workflows/deploy-script.stub` | Deploy script stub file path inside the git repository.                                                                                     |
| `deployment_timeout`        | no       | `120`                                  | Maximum wait time in seconds for deploying.                                                                                                 |
| `deployment_auto_source`    | no       | `true`                                 | Whether to automatically source environment variables into the deployment script.                                                           |
| `create_worker`             | no       | `false`                                | Create site worker.                                                                                                                         |
| `worker_connection`         | no       | `redis`                                | Worker connection (if creation is requested).                                                                                               |
| `worker_timeout`            | no       | `90`                                   | Worker timeout in seconds (if creation is requested).                                                                                       |
| `worker_sleep`              | no       | `60`                                   | Worker sleep time in seconds (if creation is requested).                                                                                    |
| `worker_tries`              | no       |                                        | Worker maximum tries (if creation is requested).                                                                                            |
| `worker_processes`          | no       | `1`                                    | Worker processes (if creation is requested).                                                                                                |
| `worker_stopwaitsecs`       | no       | `600`                                  | Worker stop wait secs (if creation is requested).                                                                                           |
| `worker_php_version`        | no       |                                        | Worker PHP version (if creation is requested). `php_version` input value will be used if not defined.                                       |
| `worker_daemon`             | no       | `true`                                 | Worker "daemon" (if creation is requested).                                                                                                 |
| `worker_force`              | no       | `false`                                | Worker "force" (if creation is requested).                                                                                                  |
| `worker_queue`              | no       |                                        | Worker queue (if creation is requested). Default queue will be used if not defined.                                                         |
| `horizon_enabled`           | no       | `false`                                | Enable Laravel Horizon integration.                                                                                                         |
| `scheduler_enabled`         | no       | `false`                                | Enable Laravel Scheduler integration.                                                                                                       |
| `quick_deploy_enabled`      | no       | `false`                                | Enable quick deployment trigger.                                                                                                            |
| `aliases`                   | no       |                                        | Comma-separated list of aliases to create based on the main host (e.g., "clientes, www"). These will be added to the SSL certificate.    |


## Outputs

| Output          | Description                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `host`          | Host of the review-app (generated or forced one in inputs).           |
| `database_name` | Database name of the review-app (generated or forced one in inputs).  |
| `site_id`       | Forge site ID of the review-app.                                      |
| `worker_id`     | Worker ID.                                                            |

You can easily use those outputs variables to generate a message on your pull-request with this action next:

```yaml
- name: PR Comment
  uses: unsplash/comment-on-pr@v1.3.0
  env:
    GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
  with:
    msg: ":rocket: Review-app available here: https://${{ steps.forge-review-app.outputs.host }}"
```

## Examples

Create or update a review-app on opened pull-requests:

```yml
name: review-app
on:
  pull_request:
    types: [ 'opened', 'reopened', 'synchronize', 'ready_for_review' ]

jobs:
  review-app:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    name: "Create or update Forge review-app"

    steps:
      - name: Deploy
        uses: web-id-fr/forge-review-app-action@v1.0.0
        with:
          forge_api_token: ${{ secrets.FORGE_API_TOKEN }}
          forge_server_id: ${{ secrets.FORGE_SERVER_ID }}
          create_database: 'true'
          database_password: ${{ secrets.FORGE_DB_PASSWORD }}
```

## Testing

We use [bats-core](https://github.com/bats-core/bats-core) for tests.


### Using Docker

Run tests using docker, locally:

```bash
docker run --rm -it $(docker build -q -f Dockerfile.test .) /code/test
```

### From your host

Prerequisites:

- bash
- curl
- jq
- shellcheck
- nodejs
- npm

Setup bats-core dependencies using npm, then run tests:

```bash
npm install
npm run test
```

## Credits

- [Ryan Gilles](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ryan-gilles-293680174/)

## License

The MIT License (MIT). Please see [License File](LICENSE.md) for more information.
